# Gunrock v0.4 -> v0.5 Porting Guide
This document hopes to help app programer to port a graph
primitive implemented using v0.4 API to v0.5 API.

There are examples with side-by-side comparison and comments, using SSSP:

sssp_enactor.cuh: https://docs.google.com/document/d/12y6eo7VvvT_URb9FjCWhYfyKq7nXKGan7RvK1eBXOVE/edit?usp=sharing

sssp_problem.cuh: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZlP57JmFo_1x8oDnY0fmUgk_9iyLziFLtYm4gQ9B_74/edit?usp=sharing

sssp_app.cu and test_sssp.cu: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rQfL3YzE1kz31jORMuk85Xmv0kh02EugLBoFqE7NJd8/edit?usp=sharing

In the following of this document, (`line number old` -> `line number new`) in the
beginning of a paragraph indicates where to look for in the annotated SSSP example,
starting from `line number old` in the old file, and from `line number new` in the
new file

## `<algo>_functor.cuh`
Merge functors into `<algo>_enactor.cuh` as lambda functions, and inputs to
the operators

## `<algo>_enactor.cuh`

- `Expand_Incoming_Kernel`
    - (38 -> 175) Define expand incoming operations as per-element lambda in
  `IterationLoop::Expand_Incoming`


- `UseParameters_enactor`
    - ( -> 32) Specify the command line parameters used by enactor


- `Iteration` -> `IterationLoop`
    - (124 -> 44) Change name from Iteration to IterationLoop

    - (125 -> 45, 145 -> 56) Only `EnactorT` as template parameter, no more
      `KernelPolicy` (defined in individual operators now)

    - (126 -> 45, 146 -> 56) Combine options past down to IterationLoopBase to a
      single 32bit binary, using hot-coded binary flags, defined in `app/enactor_iteration.cuh`

    - (137 -> ) Clean-up `typedef`, no more `GraphSliceT`, `Frontier`, `Functor`
      and `LabelT`

    - (165 -> 66) Change `FullQueue_Core(...)` and `SubQueue_Core(...)` to just
      `Core(...)`, for the core per-iteration computation; only use `peer_` as
      parameter. More on the core computation in the next section

    - (389 -> 162) `Expand_Incoming()` -> `ExpandIncoming()`
        - (389 -> 163) Reduce parameters of `ExpandIncoming()`, the related data
          are contained by the `IterationLoop` structure now

        - (38 -> 175) Define per-element operation to combine received and local
          data as a lambda function

        - (406 -> 193) Remove size checking and kernel launching, they are now
          in `BaseIterationLoop::ExpandIncomingBase`

    - (464 -> ) `Compute_OutputLength`: now `EnactorBase` can handle more cases,
      check whether that covers what's needed, or a special one needs to implement

    - (530 -> ) `Check_Queue_Size`: similar to `Compute_OutputLength`, check
      `EnactorBase`


- Core computation
    - (59 -> 88) Combine `CondEdge` and `ApplyEdge` of `Functor` into lambda
      `advance_op` (or any other name suitable), with signature:
      ```
      []__host__ __device__ (
            const VertexT &src, VertexT &dest, const SizeT &edge_id,
            const InKeyT &input_item, const SizeT &input_pos, SizeT &output_pos
            ) -> bool
      ```
      where `src` and `dest` are the source and the destination vertices of the
      edge being traveled (identified by `edge_id`), `input_item` is the item
      in the input frontier that being processed (could be a vertex or edge,
      placed at the `input_pos` position in the input frontier), and `output_pos`
      is where the output item supposed to go in the output frontier. The
      return boolean value indicates whether the traversal is valid (i.e. the
      same as the return value from `CondEdge` with the v0.4 interface).

      Algorithm specific data (e.g. per-vertex distances from the source in SSSP)
      are past as captured variables in `[]`. Restrictions of extended lambda
      functions (in F.3.15.1 of CUDA C Programming Guide, v9.1.85,
      http://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#lambda-expressions)
      apply. Captured variables are past by values; `util::Array1D` and raw
      pointers can be past, and elements inside them accessed and modified within
      the lambda.

    - (131 -> 116) Similarly, combine `CondFilter` and `ApplyFilter` of `Functor`
      into lambda `filter_op` (or any other name suitable), with the same
      signature as `advance_op`:
      ```
      []__host__ __device__ (
            const VertexT &src, VertexT &dest, const SizeT &edge_id,
            const InKeyT &input_item, const SizeT &input_pos, SizeT &output_pos
            ) -> bool
      ```

    - (71 -> 94, 113 -> 108) Update `util::io::ModifiedLoad<...>` and
      `util::io::ModifiedStore<...>` as `Load<cub::CacheLoadModifier>` and
      `Store<cub::CacheStoreModifier>`

    - (193 -> 129) Change advance operator launching interfaces as
      ```
      template <
          OprtrFlag FLAG,
          typename  GraphT,
          typename  FrontierInT,
          typename  FrontierOutT,
          typename  ParametersT,
          typename  AdvanceOpT,
          typename  FilterOpT>
      cudaError_t oprtr::advance::Launch(
          const GraphT        &graph,
          const FrontierInT  * frontier_in,
                FrontierOutT * frontier_out,
                ParametersT   &oprtr_parameters,
                AdvanceOpT     advance_op,
                FilterOpT      filter_op)
      ```
      - `FLAG` contains all the templatized operator options as a uint32_t
        value; options of `OprtrFlag` can be found in `oprtr/oprtr_base.cuh`;

      - `GraphT`, `FrontierInT`, `FrontierOutT`, `ParametersT`, `AdvanceOpT`
        and `FilterOpT` are types of the inputs, and are auto-deduced by the
        compiler;

      - `graph` is the graph that the operator works on; it needs to be graph
        representation specific, i.e. has a unique type. Eg. graph.csr() gives
        the CSR representation of a graph;

      - `frontier_in` and `frontier_out` are the input and the output frontier queues;
        `enactor_slice.frontier.V_Q()` and `enactor_slice.frontier.Next_V_Q()`
        give the current and the next VertexT-typed frontier queues; use `E_Q()`
        and `Next_E_Q()` for SizeT-typed frontier queues if that needed;
        `queue_index` and `queue_reset` from v0.4 is now automatically maintained
        by the operator, they can be changed by assigning values to
        `frontier.queue_index` and `frontier.queue_reset`; no more
        `queue_selector`;

      - `oprtr_parameters` is the running parameters of the operator; it's defined
        in `oprtr/oprtr_paramters.cuh`, and contains inputs / outputs to the
        operator kernels, except for the graph, the input / output frontier queues
        and the lambda operations;

      - `advance_op` and `filter_op` are the advance and the filter lambdas;
        the filter lambda is provided for the fuzed kernels, and the default value
        is a always-true do-nothing lambda;

      - The return value indicates whether the operator launch successfully.

- `SSSPThread` -> `Enactor::Run()`
    - (614 -> 322) The CPU controlling thread, or the OpenMP routines, are now
      part of `EnactorBase`. Just put the caller of the `Iteration_Loop` in the
      `Run()` function.


- `SSSPEnactor` -> `Enactor`
    - (684 -> 207) Add extra template flags for more flexible memory allocations;

    - (686 -> 212) Change `EnactorBase` template parameters;

    - (703 -> 235) Pass all options via `util::Parameters` from the `Enactor::Init()`
      call;

    - ( -> 239) Tell the maximum number of `VertexT` and `SizeT`-typed associate
      data to transmit together with the sub-frontier queues during inter-GPU
      communication. Communication buffers are now part of the `MGpuSlice` data
      structure, under `EnactorBase`;

    - (726 -> 257) CPU Thread / OpenMP controls are in `EnactorBase`;
      `EnactorBase::Release()` will handle that, and takes in parameter pointing
      to which location to do the allocation release, reserving to handling
      memory allocation on CPU;

    - (761 -> 278) Only pass `Problem` and allocation location to `Init`;
      options are in `util::Parameters`, and past with the `problem` instance;
      `KernelPolicy` are now in individual operators now;

    - ( -> 288) The interface of `EnactorBase::Init()` changed to:
      ```
      template <typename ProblemT>
      cudaError_t Init(
          ProblemT         &problem,
          Enactor_Flag      flag           = Enactor_None,
          unsigned int      num_queues     = 2,
          FrontierType     *frontier_types = NULL,
          util::Location    target         = util::DEVICE,
          bool              skip_makeout_selection = false)
      ```
      where `flag` is a binary hot-code compressed options, telling whether `Debug`,
      `Instrument` or `Size_Check` are in effect; `num_queues` and `frontier_types`
      tells how many frontier queues and what types (`VERTEX_FRONTIER` or
      `EDGE_FRONTIER`) of frontier queues are needed (v0.4 mostly uses two
      `VERTEX_FRONTIER`);

    - ( -> 295) Here actually allocates the frontier queues;

    - ( -> 342) Frontier reset is now in `Enactor::Reset()` instead of
      `Problem::Reset()`;

    - (845 -> 385) `Enactor::Enact()` now only calls `EnactorBase::Run_Threads()`
      or the OpenMP parallel calls, no need to control CPU threads explicitly;

    - (878 -> ) No more `KernelPolicy` and related template switches in `Enactor`.


## `<algo>_problem.cuh`

- `UseParameters_problem`
    - ( -> 28) List parameters used by the `Problem`


- `SSSPProblem` -> `Problem`
    - (35 -> 51) Change template parameters: `VertexT` and `SizeT` are enclosed
      in `GraphT`; `LabelT` is SSSP specific, used for per-vertex label marking
      the latest iteration a vertex has been marked; `ValueT` is the type of
      per-vertex distance from the source; `FLAG` is a binary compressed hot-code
      operations for the `Problem`.

    - (39 -> 55) Change `ProblemBase` and `DataSliceBase` template parameters
      accordingly.

    - (67 -> 78) `labels`, `preds` and `temp_preds` are now defined in algorithm
      specific `DataSlice`, instead of `DataSliceBase`.

    - (94 -> 106) `Release` takes in location parameter that tells where to release
      the memory allocation.

    - (134 -> 129) Drops all multi-GPU related options from `DataSlice::Init()`;
      multi-GPU related data are handled by `MGpuSlice` inside `Enactor` now.

    - ( -> 147) `DataSlice::Init()` now handles the graph movement from CPU to GPU.

    - (226 -> 157) `DataSlice::Reset()` only takes in the location parameter.

    - (235 -> ) `DataSlice` no need to handle frontiers.

    - (325 -> 171) Use heterogenous `ForEach` and `ForAll` functions to assign
      initial values.

    - (356 -> 209) Options are past via `util::Parameters` and compressed
      hot-coded `flag`, to `Problem` and `BaseProblem`.

    - (374 -> 229) `Release` takes in and handles different locations.

    - (401 -> 259) `Extract` handles extracting results from either GPU or CPU.

    - (480 -> 345) `Init` only takes in `graph` and location; all options are in
       `util::Parameters`, which past to `Problem` from the constructor.

    - (520 -> 364) Change `DataSice::Init()` caller, according to the new interface.

    - (553 -> 378) `Reset` only takes in the source vertex and location.

## `<algo>_app.cu`
- `SSSP_Parameter` ->
    - (34 -> ) `util::Parameters` takes care of all running parameters, no more
      algorithm specific parameter structures.


- `UseParameters`
    - ( -> 32) List command line parameters before using them.


- `runSSSP` -> `RunTests`
    - (88 -> test_sssp.cu::93) No need to switch parameters explicitly,
      `app::Switch_Parameters` now do that more systematically.

    - (109 -> 68) Change template parameters: `VertexT` and `SizeT` are enclosed
      within `GraphT`; `ValueT` can be different from `GraphT::ValueT`, i.e.
      the per-vertex distance from the source vertex could have different type
      as the edge weights; `mark-pred` is a non-template parameter, enclosed in
      `util::Parameters`.

    - (114 -> 70) No more algorithm specific parameters, only unified
      `util::Parameters`; no more `GRGraph`, all graphs are of the same group of
      types, and the one used for SSSP is defined at test_sssp.cu:46; takes in
      `ref_distances` for result verification (when available), a per-vertex
      array for each run.

    - (127 -> 84) Clean up parameters and variables.

    - (154 -> ) `ProblemBase` now handles memory tracking.

    - (161 -> 97) Change `Problem` constructor and `Problem::Init` parameters
      according to the definition of `Problem`; `sssp::Problem::Problem()` only
      takes in `util::Parameters`, and `sssp::Problem::Init()` only takes in
      the `graph` and location.

    - (178 -> 100) Change `Enactor::Init` parameters according to the definition
      of `Enactor`; `sssp::Enactor::Enactor()` takes in nothing, and
      `sssp::Enactor::Init()` only takes in `problem` and location.

    - (192 -> 109) `sssp::Problem::Reset` and `sssp::Enactor::Reset` now only
      takes in the source vertex and the location.

    - (198 -> 114) `sssp::Enactor::Enact` only takes in the source vertex.

    - (189 -> 118) `Round` or `Iteration` -> `Run`, when mentioning one sssp.

    - ( -> 124) Now can validate the results from each run, instead of just the
      last run.

    - (test_sssp.cu:464 -> 116) `util::info::CollectSingleRun` function handles
      collecting all needed info for a run.

    - ( -> 158) `util::info::Finalize` collects all last stage info, makes necessary
      computation, and outputs related stats.


- 'dispatchSSSP' ->
    - (239 -> ) removed, type switching is done by `app::Switch_Types`; caller
      at `test_sssp.cu:126`.


- `gunrock_sssp`
    - (351 -> 177) `gunrock_sssp` now is templatized for different graph types;
      parameters are past via `util::Parameters`, instead of `GRSetup`; outputs
      are past out via two raw arrays, instead of a dummy graph.

    - (358 -> ) `streams` and `context` are defined within `Enactor`, no need to
      define at high level.

    - (393 -> 184) instead of calling `runTests` with extra timings and result
      validation, `gunrock_sssp` only runs the minimum routines, providing best
      performance when run in library mode.


- `sssp`
    - (406 -> 238) `sssp` now is templatized; parameters are rearranged, and
      handles multiple sources for multiple runs.

    - (423 -> 261) new way of handling running parameters, using `util::Parameters`.

    - (426 -> 274) new way of passing memory to the graph structure.


## `test_<algo>.cu`
- include and namespace
    - (15 -> 15) clean up includes and namespaces.


- `Usage` ->
    - (56 -> ) `util::Parameters::Print_Help` lists all command line parameters,
      based on their definitions.


- `DisplaySolution` -> `app::sssp::DisplaySolution`
    - (126 -> app/sssp_test.cuh:46) Move to `app/sssp_test.cuh`.


- `ReferenceSssp` -> `app::sssp::CPU_Reference`
    - (159 -> app/sssp_test.cuh:76) Move to `app/sssp_test.cuh`, implement
      a simple CPU reference when boost is not available.


- `RunTests` -> `app::sssp::RunTests`
    - (288 -> app/sssp_app.cu:68) directly use `app::sssp::RunTests`.

    - (512 -> app/sssp_test.cuh:272) Move to 'app::sssp::Validate_Result', and
      implement validation without reference results.

    - (638 -> ) type and parameter switches now use `app::Switch_Types` and
      `app::Switch_Parameters`.


- 'main'
    - (656 -> 28) Change main function enclosure into `main_struct::operator()`.

    - (665 -> app/sssp/sssp_app.cuh:90) Instance of `util::info` is defined in
      `app::sssp::RunTests`.

    - (673 -> 55) Move graph loading from `util::info::Init` into
      'graphio::LoadGraph'.

    - ( -> 68) Compute per-run CPU reference results, when needed.

    - (729 -> 114) Use `util::Parameters` to handle command line parameters.

    - (737 -> 126) Use 'app::Switch_Types' to switch graph types, depending
      on template flags given.
